# contaminationQC

ContaminationQC is designed to detect cross contamination in next-generation sequencing (NGS) data. Specifically it identifies cases where a single human sample has been contaminated by one or more other human samples. It does this by looking at the sex chromosomes and considering whether there is evidence that more than one individual is present. This is based on the fact that male samples should be hemizygous for chrX while female samples should not contain any material from chrY (note that this approach cannot detect contamination of female samples with DNA from other female samples). The advantages of this approach to contamination detection are that it is extremely sensitive to low levels of contamination (down to ~1% contamination), allowing detection of contamination levels that are indetectable by most methods but would affect cancer samples where low variant allele frequencies need to be detected. It requires no prior knowledge of the sample's genotype so is suitable for tumour-only sequencing and is not affected by the chaotic copy number changes that often characterise solid tumours.

ContaminationQC consistes of a single perl script. It takes as input the sample gender, a json format configuration file and a 'bedplus' file of genomic windows to be used for contamination detection.
The json config file can be made using the supporting script reference_panel_build.pl. It requires the same 'bedplus' input file as contaminationQC, plus a series of uncontaminated normal blood/tissue samples to use as a reference set.
The first three columns of the 'bedplus' file are standard bed format and the fourth column is a comma separated list of SNP alleles. For autosomes and chrY these can be N,N, but for chrX the windows must identify a single base that is a bi-allelic SNP, preferably with a high rate of heterozygotes in the population, and the fourth column must contain the ref and alt alleles, e.g. A,C.
